---
title: How can system mapping data become a springboard for collective action?
index: "2"
filter: question
---

## 2. How can system mapping data become a springboard for collective action?

**[Annie]** Systems mapping for the purpose of our conversation is referring to a way in which to better understand and identify opportunities.  A system being a set of ‘things’ working together as parts of an interconnecting network to accomplish an overall goal.  

My own use of the term is coming from the field of social network analysis, the aim of which is to understand a "community" (or "system") by mapping the individuals, groups, and relationships that connect them as a networks. The system could be simple, or indeed highly complex. Systems mapping helps us to understand all these ‘things’ — the entities of a system — and how they relate to each other.  It is a tool, or artefact that can support a systems thinking approach by communicating an understanding of the system. 

My particular interest is in the use of system mapping to help tackle strategic problems that require working together and a partnership approach for social development - public sector, civil society organisations, social enterprise - collective action.  

So the question is really seeking to explore how the information, knowledge and wisdom enabled through a system mapping approach can be democratised?  How can we ensure the outputs of this tool are accessible to all, trusted by all, usable by all?  Where can the mapping data itself become a catalyst for change?

**[Natasha]** This is interesting. I know you have an established practice in data sensemaking for specific clients and with specific partners. It sounds like you’re interested in looking beyond the discreet project to the idea of connecting the data collected to a wider audience. In your current practice, if I understand correctly, the data is collected within an initial closed group of partners working to a defined purpose. This produces a repository of data, drawn from the ‘system’ or community, but also potentially useful to others beyond the initial group. So I think your interest is in how to democratise access to this data, make sure that the quality of the data can be scrutinised and verified, and potentially bring in more active partners to the network in order to bring about meaningful change.

**[Annie]** Yes exactly.  The process starts with a closed group of stakeholders until there is, as you say, an initial repository of data. In a way, the projects themselves aim to work along the [data spectrum](https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/the-data-spectrum/?__cf_chl_jschl_tk__=f9e2cebfb46dbd242ad9dfe2a4208a7f254f8d8f-1613125141-0-AYvTIsFNWdRgaRshhsCPChCkNblNpasU9oE5ldmtrHi7CYkQjs9EhxiKdFJ6IGmaEqHexS59VxUQYxf4pbeAe73r71geNLIPKyy7J7rfSed6s2bmZqdbmNQluaf9B5uqEfwJIhSPbGhzxk1w9K9AXPoE5-7EbDOZgPt1ZrwPczcDb52mOPWDMyaHKr6cs3d2nwYlYg1ZN0i20SeM6psD89iWV8nLPfP-DbEM1YpGzLgHLq20NlLvK9s_6Hdt0MPH3xS-BXnws4318sX2lpXcIZns2eIR6mylqTYXHTp46OgZESJfyECylF9f0E1lwfoVMuVWXFcsCtbCbXJV1Y9hRqfILtHqANAgZ-_aU4A3QxG9) (as defined by the ODI), ideally to a point of public access, and even open where there is value to the wider system in doing so.  There are some really interesting developments in this space including [Open Data Manchester](https://www.opendatamanchester.org.uk/), a not-for-profit community interest company driving responsible and open data across the city. An example project is leading the [development of a data cooperative model for small energy cooperatives](https://www.opendatamanchester.org.uk/building-an-ethical-energy-data-co-operative/), *"The aim of the project is to explore if a cooperative model of data custodianship could allow members energy data to be collected, used and shared more effectively both within and outside the cooperative, returning value to the individual member, the cooperative and wider society".*

**[Natasha]** This is in the realm of data institutions, such as data commons, data trusts and data co-operatives which are organisational and legal structures for managing data, including data rights, consents, personal data and privacy. Most data is personal, in one way or another, so these kind of protocols are fundamental if data is to be collected and used in an open way outside of its usual silos. There is interesting work going on in this area, including how the mechanisms for members of a data institution to make decisions about what the data held can be used for. And these institutions can be used for stewardship of data collection as an ongoing activity, which may be a route to a financially sustainable entity.

**[Annie]** I think the concept of data cooperatives is very interesting and the power shift that comes with shared ownership. [Mozilla Foundation](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/initiatives/data-futures/data-for-empowerment/what-is-a-data-cooperative/) has some interesting explanations of this, and a very useful list of [data stewardship literature](https://airtable.com/shrrFNH3DObwYrlbU/tblyKb4qZ5VYaE0lu/viwyJ98yPY30fv2gs?blocks=hide).  

**[Natasha]** Your question raises lots of lines of inquiry. To democratise access to data, some basic requirements must be met i.e. citizens must have access to the technology, appropriate interfaces that make the data accessible and some data literacy (not insignificant asks). But beyond this, democracy fails if people don’t show up. Democratic systems depend on a level of engagement from a diverse range of citizens. If the project is to be built on a genuinely broad base of engagement, the people (the demos) have to see the value in engaging with data  i.e. that data can make a case for change, that data can make things happen and that they can play a part in deciding what that change might be. I think that sharing practical examples to demonstrate the power of data to effect change are useful here, and there’s more to say about deliberative processes in democracy, but I’ll leave it there for now. Can you see a place for any of this in your sensemaking practice, Annie?

**[Annie]** Absolutely.  Accessibility and inclusion are key principles, both from a collective ownership perspective, but also in access to the data itself - what tools for adding, editing and sharing the dataset that are appropriate, open and relevant for the mapped system so that it can evolve in an open and democratic way.  For example, when mapping organisations are we thinking about access for organisations that have limited resources, barriers to digital, or English, and are unable to find the time to engage and miss opportunities?  Are there power structures in place that make organisations feel like they don’t have control?  We have built in to our process a phase of facilitating guiding principles and addressing ethics at the outset of each research project. 

**[Pete]** As far as I understand successful system mapping approaches, is that in many cases, they are human systems, they rely upon clear, fair, and discrete exchanges of value between people and a product or service. Other human systems might rely on contributions from participants and highlight in-kind benefits of collaboration. But exchanges of value can be distorted when a system is tracking behavior, monitoring clicks, and stockpiling detailed personal information, because people may never learn the true value of information they have contributed, and so not able, to truly benefit from the exchange. To maintain trust and integrity over the long term, perhaps we should always examine the detail and degree of the benefits being exchanged and explore what is valuable to those whose information is being used.

So, the later part of the question ‘*How can we ensure the outputs of this tool are accessible to all, trusted by all, usable by all? Where can the mapping data itself become a catalyst for change’?* is relevant. The process of data gathering, pushing, using, storing and promoting over a system has developed quickly over the last five years. One of the recognized gaps, is that data governance, which should enable us as humans, communities, collectives and organisations, to answer critical questions about results and decision-making of data applications, is not what it should be. This includes, who is accountable? how does data align with the community, collective, human or business strategy. What processes could be modified to improve the safe collection and ethical use of outputs? What controls need to be in place to track data for bias and pinpoint problems? 

Are these results consistent and reproducible? I think the ability to answer these questions and respond to the outcomes of data systems requires a more flexible and adaptable form of approach, when you think traditionally these functions would have been applied to static processes. But data processes are iterative (they change) So you would imagine the governance/care must as well; I think we can improve this, in exactly how the question states, that the data itself becomes a catalyst for change, because, although the map is just a map, driving successful, change means creating successful co-operative execution of the mapping, which depends then on the data being part of something greater than just the collection process.

**[Alex]** This kind of sensemaking is kind of central to the identity of Google, Facebook, and many other companies. Finding ways to capture system information, to catalogue and organise, and then use this data to drive changes. They are "data driven", and this is both high praise and the source of many issues. Is the answer to these issues to create "the peoples Facebook"? Is the primary issue the governance of the machine or the machine itself? I think that the question of dual-direction engagement with data, of both contributing to a system map and and benefitting from that system map, is interesting - but I think it's necessary to strip back the network question and ask how a 'node' can exist in that system in a way that treats their agency and control as sacrosanct. Consent for wider connections and communities can only be built on that foundation of trust.

In other words, if I represent a collective, a small group. What data do I own? Well, an infinite variety, but on a basic level there's the fact that I exist in some form. That I exist with some purpose. And, perhaps, that I'm not insular. I'm looking to connect in some way to other people. This is information that I (or we) hold, regardless of whether I'm conscious of it, or if I choose to write it down or digitise it or share it publicly. For some groups, sharing this kind of information openly might be natural, but these groups are often more well served by existing network structures. For other groups this isn't the case, and it's particularly for those groups who are failed or put in danger by existing practices that this question has the most urgency. The only way to build a network that everyone can participate in is to ensure that everyone can trust the network, and the only way to do that is to remove the concept of trust entirely, to guarantee that each group is 100% in control of all aspects of their data at all time - what data is in the system, who gets to see it, who gets to even know about it. 

As a baseline we can think about the advantages of real life, physical relationships. We can encounter each other as one person to another. We can mutually agree to meet. We can walk away and forget each other. Our relationship isn't mediated through a third party. The question for me is how do we maintain these advantages of physical communities while expanding into online spaces - using the advantages of digital connection to build networks that span physical and virtual without sacrificing control or privacy? 

There's a ton of interesting development (and a ton of less interesting development) going on in the distributed peer-to-peer space that might help - for example, [Solid](https://solid.mit.edu/), [Sandstorm](https://sandstorm.io/), or [Urbit](https://urbit.org/) - technologies build around complete private ownership of data, and direct connection between peers without intermediary mediation. For a long time I felt quite pessimistic about these developments, as the language of privacy and personal control feels inadequate - we so often see that privacy concerns alone are not enough to motivate individual action. It's only recently that something has clicked, that I've realised that part of that pessimism is from being trapped in a 'digital realism', and that these software developments can be a first step in reclaiming technology as a tool for personal + collective empowerment (even if some of the first developments look a lot like recreations of things that already exist).

Well, that's a bit of a tangent from where this question started - but my point is to question what it means to have a democratic network, or to ask where the limitations are of open data.

**[Annie]** Yes and thank-you Alex as these are also hugely relevant points - referring to my reference to [The Data Spectrum](https://theodi.org/about-the-odi/the-data-spectrum/?__cf_chl_jschl_tk__=f9e2cebfb46dbd242ad9dfe2a4208a7f254f8d8f-1613125141-0-AYvTIsFNWdRgaRshhsCPChCkNblNpasU9oE5ldmtrHi7CYkQjs9EhxiKdFJ6IGmaEqHexS59VxUQYxf4pbeAe73r71geNLIPKyy7J7rfSed6s2bmZqdbmNQluaf9B5uqEfwJIhSPbGhzxk1w9K9AXPoE5-7EbDOZgPt1ZrwPczcDb52mOPWDMyaHKr6cs3d2nwYlYg1ZN0i20SeM6psD89iWV8nLPfP-DbEM1YpGzLgHLq20NlLvK9s_6Hdt0MPH3xS-BXnws4318sX2lpXcIZns2eIR6mylqTYXHTp46OgZESJfyECylF9f0E1lwfoVMuVWXFcsCtbCbXJV1Y9hRqfILtHqANAgZ-_aU4A3QxG9), truly being open is hard and inevitably will take time and patience.  I often think about the concept of data stewardship, and how this is one way in which to try and engender trust, but also comes with the challenges you identify quite clearly here - is their trust in the who / what / how the data stewardship is managed? Are there hidden power structures at play that will influence the desired state of openness?

**[Alex]** Yeah, I think the Data Spectrum is an interesting model for this in a few ways. First in highlighting that natural gradation between something which is completely private, vs something I share with a specific person or group. But there's some stuff left unsaid here (to an extent deliberately - it's a simple and useful model). They offer a spectrum between personal-commerical, and this is what I was trying to get at earlier when saying that the language of personal privacy feels like it's limited, or obscuring something. For a lot of systems data it makes sense to use the 'commercial' label - even if non-commercial, you might be dealing with a formalised organisation with a legal status - but when we talk about democratising data or thinking about agency, what we're adding to the mix is often an informal group of people. I.e. there may be a system or a collective, but one that exists only as a gathering of people rather than as an abstract, formal entity. So for me that's a key part of this question, how to link systems mapping with existing collectives without forcing engagement in some formal or mediated way with a third party.

The other interesting thing to touch on with regards to the ODI Data Spectrum is that it covers the licensing of data itself, but not the way that data is often controlled by a platform owner. I.e. we might have a closed conversation, but the connection between us is undoubtedly being modelled on some social graph by various companies. And I'm not a purist about that, but this comes back to wanting to break out of this 'digital realism' that suggests it's natural or inevitable for our interactions to be tracked. The alternative is increasing conspiracy, skepticism, and unwillingness to engage - i.e. is the NHS covid app spying on you? Well, no, but your phone definitely is in general so it's not unreasonable to be wary.